REACT19_SUPPORT_SUMMARY.md, before:

# React 19 Support Implementation Summary

## Overview
react-datasheet-grid now supports React 19 while maintaining backward compatibility with React 15-18.

## Changes Made

### 1. Updated Dependencies
- **package.json**: Added React 19 to peerDependencies
  ```json
  "peerDependencies": {
    "react": "^15.0.0 || ^16.0.0 || ^17.0.0 || ^18.0.0 || ^19.0.0"
  }
  ```

### 2. Component Updates
- **DataSheetGrid.tsx**: Maintained forwardRef for backward compatibility
- **StaticDataSheetGrid.tsx**: Maintained forwardRef for backward compatibility
- Both components continue to use forwardRef to ensure refs work correctly across all React versions (15-19)

### 3. Testing
- Created comprehensive React 19 compatibility tests in `tests/react19Compatibility.test.tsx`
- Tests verify:
  - Components render without errors with refs
  - Ref methods are accessible and functional
  - Both DynamicDataSheetGrid and StaticDataSheetGrid work correctly
  - forwardRef implementation works across React versions

### 4. Documentation
- Created `REACT19_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md` with:
  - Compatibility information
  - Performance optimization tips
  - Migration steps
  - Troubleshooting guide
  
### 5. Example and Development Dependencies
- Updated example project to support React 19:
  - React and React-DOM updated to ^19.0.0
  - TypeScript types updated to ^19.0.0
- Updated main project devDependencies for testing with React 19

## Key Decisions

### Why Keep forwardRef?
While React 19 supports ref as a prop, we maintained forwardRef to ensure:
1. **Backward Compatibility**: Works with React 15-18 without changes
2. **No Breaking Changes**: Users don't need to update their code
3. **Future Flexibility**: Can remove forwardRef in a future major version when React 19+ adoption is widespread

### Performance Considerations
- React 19's compiler automatically optimizes components
- We recommend keeping React.memo() on cell components for large datasets
- Column configurations should still be memoized

## Testing Results
- All existing tests pass ✓
- New React 19 compatibility tests pass ✓
- No breaking changes introduced ✓

## Future Considerations
In a future major version (v5.x), consider:
- Removing forwardRef when React 19+ adoption is widespread
- Leveraging React 19's compiler optimizations more aggressively
- Exploring Server Components for read-only grids

Commit message:

Release version 4.12.0: Added support for React 19, updated dependencies, and removed the React 19 migration guide. Updated changelog and package.json accordingly.

REACT19_SUPPORT_SUMMARY.md, after:

# React 19 Support Implementation Summary

## Overview
react-datasheet-grid now supports React 19 while maintaining backward compatibility with React 15-18.

## Changes Made

### 1. Updated Dependencies
- **package.json**: Added React 19 to peerDependencies
  ```json
  "peerDependencies": {
    "react": "^15.0.0 || ^16.0.0 || ^17.0.0 || ^18.0.0 || ^19.0.0"
  }
  ```

- **Core Dependencies**: Updated to React 19 compatible versions
  - `react-resize-detector`: Updated from `^7.1.2` to `^12.0.2`
  - `@tanstack/react-virtual`: Updated from `^3.0.0-beta.18` to `^3.13.10`

- **Development Dependencies**: Updated for React 19 support
  - `@testing-library/react`: Updated from `^13.4.0` to `^16.1.0`
  - `@types/react`: Updated to `^19.0.0`
  - `react` and `react-dom`: Updated to `^19.0.0` for development

### 2. Component Updates
- **DataSheetGrid.tsx**: Maintained forwardRef for backward compatibility
- **StaticDataSheetGrid.tsx**: Maintained forwardRef for backward compatibility
- Both components continue to use forwardRef to ensure refs work correctly across all React versions (15-19)

### 3. Testing
- Created comprehensive React 19 compatibility tests in `tests/react19Compatibility.test.tsx`
- Tests verify:
  - Components render without errors with refs
  - Ref methods are accessible and functional
  - Both DynamicDataSheetGrid and StaticDataSheetGrid work correctly
  - forwardRef implementation works across React versions

### 4. Documentation
- Created `REACT19_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md` with:
  - Compatibility information
  - Performance optimization tips
  - Migration steps
  - Troubleshooting guide
  
### 5. Example and Development Dependencies
- Updated example project to support React 19:
  - React and React-DOM updated to ^19.0.0
  - TypeScript types updated to ^19.0.0
- Updated main project devDependencies for testing with React 19

## Key Decisions

### Why Keep forwardRef?
While React 19 supports ref as a prop, we maintained forwardRef to ensure:
1. **Backward Compatibility**: Works with React 15-18 without changes
2. **No Breaking Changes**: Users don't need to update their code
3. **Future Flexibility**: Can remove forwardRef in a future major version when React 19+ adoption is widespread

### Performance Considerations
- React 19's compiler automatically optimizes components
- We recommend keeping React.memo() on cell components for large datasets
- Column configurations should still be memoized

## Testing Results
- All existing tests pass ✓
- New React 19 compatibility tests pass ✓
- No breaking changes introduced ✓

## Future Considerations
In a future major version (v5.x), consider:
- Removing forwardRef when React 19+ adoption is widespread
- Leveraging React 19's compiler optimizations more aggressively
- Exploring Server Components for read-only grids
